---
alias: [2022-06-01,20:01,,,,,,,,,,,]
---
[[ancient and medieval history c11]]
table of content
```toc
```

[[2022-06-01]] 20:01
- chera dynasty (or cēra), ipa: [t͡ʃeːɾɐ], also known as keralaputra, was one of principal lineages in [[sangam 岁 சங்ககாலம்]] period history of state of [[kerala]] & kongu nadu region of western tamil nadu in southern india. together with cholas of uraiyur (tiruchirappalli) & pandyas of madurai, early cheras were known as one of three major powers (muventar) of ancient tamilakam  in early centuries of common era.the chera country was geographically well placed to profit from maritime trade via extensive indian ocean networks. exchange of spices, especially black pepper, with middle eastern & graeco-roman merchants are attested in several sources. cheras of early historical period (c. second century bce - c. third century ce) are known to have had their original centre at karur in  kongu nadu & harbours at muchiri (muziris) & thondi (tyndis) on indian ocean coast (kerala). they governed area of malabar coast between alappuzha in south to kasaragod in north. this included palakkad gap, coimbatore, salem, & kolli hills. region around coimbatore was ruled by cheras during sangam period between c. 1st & 4th centuries ce & it served as eastern entrance to palakkad gap, principal trade route between malabar coast & tamil nadu. however southern region of present-day kerala state (the coastal belt between thiruvananthapuram & southern alappuzha) was under ay dynasty, who was more related to pandya dynasty of madurai.the early historic pre-pallava tamil polities are often described as a "kinship-based redistributive economies" largely shaped by "pastoral-cum-agrarian subsistence" & "predatory politics". tamil brahmi cave label inscriptions, describe ilam kadungo, son of perum kadungo, & grandson of ko athan cheral of irumporai clan. inscribed portrait coins with brahmi legends give a number of chera names. reverse of these coins often contained chera bow & arrow symbol. anthologies of early tamil texts are a major source of information about early cheras. chenguttuvan, or good chera, is famous for traditions surrounding kannaki, principal female character of tamil epic poem chilapathikaram. after end of early historical period, around 3rd-5th century ce, there seems to be a period where cheras' power declined considerably.cheras of kongu country are known to have controlled western tamil nadu & central kerala in early medieval period. present-day central kerala probably detached from kongu chera kingdom around 8th-9th century ad to form chera perumal kingdom (c. 9th- 12th century ad). exact nature of relationships between various branches of chera rulers is somewhat unclear.the nambutiris asked for a regent of chera king from karur in coimbatore & were granted prime minister hailing from pundurai. hence zamorin holds title 'punthurakkon' (king from punthura).after this, malabar & kerala parts became autonomous of karur.  some of major dynasties of medieval south india - chalukya, pallava, pandya, rashtrakuta, & chola - seems to have conquered chera or kerala country. kongu cheras appear to have been absorbed into pandya political system by 10th/11th century ad. even after dissolution of perumal kingdom, royal inscriptions & temple grants, especially from outside kerala proper, continued to refer country & people as "cheras or keralas".the rulers of venad (the venad cheras or "kulasekharas"), based out of port of kollam in south kerala, claimed their ancestry from perumals. cheranad was also name of an erstwhile province in kingdom of zamorin of calicut, which had included parts of present-day tirurangadi & tirur taluks of malappuram district in it. later it became a taluk of malabar district, when malabar came under british raj. headquarters of cheranad taluk was town of tirurangadi. later taluk was merged with eranad taluk. in modern period rulers of cochin & travancore (in kerala) also claimed title "chera".
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/chera%20dynasty)
```query
"chera dynasty"
```