- • Curative Petition: It is a redressal-seeking mechanism which is the final resort by the aggrieved party to receive justice in the court of law, that is, the resort available for redressal of grievances after the dismissal of review petition having the same grounds as curative petition. The jurisprudence behind the mechanism of curative petition is to thwart miscarriage of law and order and ensure smooth functioning of justice system.
 - ◦ The legal requirements regarding the petition are narrow in scope and hence it is accepted only in rare cases. Generally such petitions are not heard in open court and might be heard in judge’s chamber.
 - • The concept of curative petition is based on Article 137 of the [[宪法 constitution]] which provides that “subject to provisions of any law and rules made under Article 145, the Supreme Court has the power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.” Article 145 is related to procedures and practices of the court. High Court does not have powers to review its own judgement.
 - • The concept of curative petition is based on the Latin maxim “[[actus curiae neminem gravabit]]” which means that the act of the Court shall prejudice no one. It is based on the idea that the court has to undo the wrong done to a party.
 - • The reason for its creation is to address the loopholes in the justice mechanism and cure the lapses. It ensures that everyone is equally heard and given chance to represent themselves before court of law. It also protects petitioners against corruption and biases of the system. It is a review of the order and not a matter of right. The requirements have to be fulfilled to ensure that the petition is allowed, heard and then accepted by the Bench.
 - • The idea of Curative petition was conceptualized by the Supreme Court of India in the landmark case [[Rupa Ashok Hurra vs. Ashok Hurra & Anr]]. The concept was developed by the apex court of the country to prevent exploitation of power and ensure fair delivery of justice. The issue was whether a person could claim any relief after the final verdict of the court has been pronounced and the review petition has been dismissed.
 • The Apex court of the country has laid down some guidelines which are required to be fulfilled in the curative petitions, which are:
 ◦ The petitioner has to prove before the court that there was serous violation of principles of natural justice.
 ◦ The curative petition can only be filed after dismissal of review petition which was based on the same grounds as curative one.
 ◦ The aforementioned requirements are valid only if certified by a senior lawyer.
 ◦ The petition has to be sent to three senior most judges and judges of the bench who passed the judgement affecting the petition.
 ◦ If majority of judges agree that the petition is admissible and requires hearing, it is generally sent to the same bench which dismissed the petition.
 ◦ It is the discretion of the court to impose exemplary costs if petitioner’s plea lacks merit.
 • There is no time limit for filing a curative petition. Hence, statement 3 is correct.
 • Review Petition: The Review petitions are filed under Article 137 of the Constitution that enables Supreme Court to review its own judgement. Under Supreme Court rules, 1966, these petitions should be filed within 30 days of judgement.