---
alias: [,]
---

[[2022-03-13]] 20:19
It is the amount of money created by commercial banks for a given fixed amount of base money and reserve ratio.
An increase in the cash reserve ratio prevents the banks from lending more money and reduces the money multiplier.
The Central Bank increases the reserve requirements for the Commercial banks. It will lead to a decrease in the money multiplier.
An increase in the banking habit of the population will increase the lending, thereby will lead to more deposits in the banking system, hence increasing the money multiplier.
Even if there is an increase in the population of the country, the money multiplier in an economy does not necessarily increase.
The money created by the Federal Reserve is the monetary base, also known as high-powered money. Banks create money by making loans.
A bank loans or invests its excess reserves to earn more interest.
A one-dollar increase in the monetary base causes the money supply to increase by more than one dollar.
The increase in the money supply is the money multiplier.
The money multiplier increases with increasing capability with the banks to provide loans and this depends on the number of deposits available with the banks.
More bank accounts and an increase in minimum balance requirement provide more deposits to the banks while more withdrawals and increase in reserve requirements reduce such deposits to be used for providing loans.

`2021-10-16`  `17:14`
money multiplier - 1/ [[cash reserve ratio]]

[[_economics 经济 MOC]]

- 钱 Multiplier 是 د ratio 和 د stock 和  钱 于 د stock 和 高 powered  钱. 它 是 د relationship 中 د monetary base 和  钱 supply 和 an [[_economics 经济 MOC]]. 它 explains د 提高 里 د amount 和 cash 里 circulation generated by د banks' ability 于 lend  钱 out 和 their depositors' funds. Therefore, 它 refers 于 how an initial deposit can lead 于 a bigger final 提高 里 د total  钱 supply.
  collapsed:: true
	- For example, if د commercial banks gain deposits 和 Rs1 Lakh 和 this leads 于 a final  钱 supply 和 Rs 10 lakh. د  钱 multiplier 是 10.
	- Therefore, 提高 里 [[banking]] habit 和 د [[人口]] would lead 于 更 deposits 和 hence 提高 里  钱 Multiplier. 于 
```query
"money multiplier"
```