---
alias: [2022-06-19,19:01,,,,,,,,,,,]
---
- [[nigeria]] [[monkey]] [[smallpox]]
table of content
```toc
```

- [[2022-06-19]] 19:01
- **monkeypox** is an infectious viral disease that can occur in both humans and some other animals. Symptoms include fever, swollen lymph nodes, and a rash that forms blisters and then crusts over. The time from exposure to onset of symptoms ranges from 5 to 21 days. The duration of symptoms is typically 2 to 4 weeks. There may be mild symptoms, but to what extent it may occur without any symptoms is not known. The classic presentation of fever and muscle pains, followed by swollen glands, with lesions all at the same stage, has not been found to be common to all outbreaks. Cases may be severe, especially in children, pregnant women or people with suppressed immune systems.The disease is caused by monkeypox viruses (known as Zoonotic virus), in the genus Orthopoxvirus. The variola virus, the causative agent of smallpox, was also in this genus. Of the two types in humans, the West African type causes a less severe disease than the Central African (Congo Basin) type. It may spread from handling bushmeat, animal bites or scratches, body fluids, contaminated objects, or other close contact with an infected person. Spread can occur by small droplets and possibly the airborne route. People can spread the virus from the onset of symptoms until all the lesions have scabbed and fallen off; with some evidence of spread for more than a week after lesions have crusted. The virus is believed to normally spread among certain rodents in Africa. Diagnosis can be confirmed by testing a lesion for the virus's DNA. The disease can appear similar to chickenpox.There is no known cure. The smallpox vaccine was found to be around 85% protective in preventing infection in close contacts and in lessening the severity of the disease. A newer smallpox and monkeypox vaccine based on modified vaccinia Ankara has been approved, but with limited availability. Other measures include regular hand washing and avoiding sick people and other animals. Antiviral drugs, cidofovir and tecovirimat, vaccinia immune globulin and the smallpox vaccine may be used during outbreaks. The risk of death has varied from 0% to 11%. Most people recover.The disease is no longer believed to be as rare as previously thought; possibly as a result of waning immunity since the stopping of routine smallpox vaccination. Cases have significantly increased since the 1980s. Sporadic cases occur frequently in Central and West Africa, and it is highly endemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Hunters in the tropical forests of Central and West Africa are most at risk. It was first identified as a distinct illness in 1958 among laboratory monkeys in Copenhagen, Denmark. Monkeys are not a natural reservoir of the virus. The first cases in humans were found in 1970 in the DRC. An outbreak that occurred in the United States in 2003 was traced to a pet store where rodents imported from Ghana were sold. Since 2017, a large outbreak has been occurring in Nigeria. The 2022 monkeypox outbreak represents the first incidence of widespread community transmission outside of Africa, which was initially identified in the United Kingdom in May 2022, with subsequent cases confirmed in at least 20 countries, in Europe, North America, South America, Asia, Africa, and Australia.
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monkeypox)