---
alias: [2022-06-03,15:23,,,,,,,,,,,]
---
[[bretton woods agreement]]
table of content
```toc
```

- [[2022-06-03]] 15:23
- new hampshire is a state in new england region of [[united states of america]]. it is bordered by massachusetts to south, vermont to west, maine & gulf of maine to east, & canadian province of quebec to north. of 50 u.s. states, new hampshire is fifth smallest by area & tenth least populous, with slightly more than 1.3 million residents. concord is state capital, while manchester is largest city. *new hampshire's motto, "live free or die", reflects its role in american revolutionary war*; its nickname, "the [[granite]] state", refers to its extensive granite formations & quarries. it is best known nationwide for holding first primary (after iowa caucus) in u.s. presidential election cycle.new hampshire was inhabited for thousands of years by algonquian-speaking peoples such as abenaki. europeans arrived in early [[17th century]], with english establishing some of earliest non-indigenous settlements. province of new hampshire was established in [[1629]], named after english county of hampshire. following mounting tensions between british colonies & crown during 1760s, new hampshire saw one of earliest overt acts of rebellion, with seizing of fort william & mary from british in [[1774]]. in january [[1776]], it became first of british north american colonies to establish an independent government & state constitution; six months later, it signed united states declaration of independence & contributed troops, ships, & supplies in war against britain. in june [[1788]], it was ninth state to ratify u.s. constitution, bringing that document into effect.

- through mid-19th century, new hampshire was an active center of abolitionism, & fielded close to 32,000 men for union during u.s. civil war. after war, state saw rapid industrialization & population growth, becoming a center of textile manufacturing, shoemaking, & papermaking; amoskeag manufacturing company in manchester was at one time largest cotton textile plant in world. merrimack & connecticut rivers were lined with industrial mills, most of which employed workers from canada & europe; french canadians formed most significant influx of immigrants, & today roughly a quarter of all new hampshire residents claim french american ancestry, second only to maine.

- reflecting a nationwide trend, new hampshire's industrial sector declined after second world war. since [[1950]], its [[economy]] has heavily diversified to include financial & professional services, real estate, education, & transportation, with manufacturing still higher than national average. beginning in [[1980]]s, its population surged as major highways connected it to greater boston & led to more bedroom communities. in 21st century, new hampshire is among wealthiest states in u.s., with seventh-highest median household income & some of lowest rates of poverty, unemployment, & crime. it is one of only nine states without an income tax, & has no taxes on sales, capital gains, or inheritance; consequently, its overall tax burden is lowest in u.s. after florida. new hampshire ranks among top ten states in metrics such as governance, healthcare, socioeconomic opportunity, & fiscal stability.with its mountainous & heavily forested terrain, new hampshire has a growing tourism sector centered on outdoor recreation. it has some of highest ski mountains on east coast & is a major destination for winter sports; mount monadnock is among most climbed mountains in u.s. other activities include observing fall foliage, summer cottages along many lakes & seacoast, motorsports at new hampshire motor speedway, & motorcycle week, a popular motorcycle rally held in weirs beach in laconia. white mountain national forest links vermont & maine portions of appalachian trail, & has mount washington auto road, where visitors may drive to top of 6,288-foot (1,917 m) mount washington.
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/new%20hampshire)
```query
"new hampshire"
```