- 它 was adopted by General Assembly in 2000 and came into force in 2003. د Convention 是 د first comprehensive and global legally binding instrument 于 fight transnational organized crime. States that 有 ratified UNTOC commit themselves 于 taking a series of measures 于 prevent and control transnational organized crime, including (i) د criminalising of د participation in an organized criminal group, of money laundering, related corruption and obstruction of justice and (ii) د adoption of frameworks for extradition, mutual legal assistance and international cooperation. د UNTOC 是 further supplemented by three Protocols, which target specific forms of organized crime:
	 - د Protocol 于 Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, provides an agreed upon definition of trafficking in persons. It aims at comprehensively addressing trafficking in persons through د so-called three P's - Prosecution of perpetrators, Protection of victims and Prevention of trafficking.
	 - د Protocol against د Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, 也 provides a definition of smuggling of migrants. د Protocol aims at preventing and controlling smuggling of migrants, promoting cooperation among States Parties, while protecting د rights of smuggled migrants.
	 - د Protocol against د Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, their Parts and Components and Ammunition promotes, facilitates and strengthens cooperation among States Parties in order 于 prevent and control د illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition by mainly committing Member States 于 introduce solid registration and storage systems for all legally produced arms.